Documentation/bpf/clang-notes.rst, before:

.. contents::
.. sectnum::

==========================
Clang implementation notes
==========================

This document provides more details specific to the Clang/LLVM implementation of the eBPF instruction set.

Versions
========

Clang defined "CPU" versions, where a CPU version of 3 corresponds to the current eBPF ISA.

Clang can select the eBPF ISA version using ``-mcpu=v3`` for example to select version 3.

Arithmetic instructions
=======================

For CPU versions prior to 3, Clang v7.0 and later can enable ``BPF_ALU`` support with
``-Xclang -target-feature -Xclang +alu32``.  In CPU version 3, support is automatically included.

Atomic operations
=================

Clang can generate atomic instructions by default when ``-mcpu=v3`` is
enabled. If a lower version for ``-mcpu`` is set, the only atomic instruction
Clang can generate is ``BPF_ADD`` *without* ``BPF_FETCH``. If you need to enable
the atomics features, while keeping a lower ``-mcpu`` version, you can use
``-Xclang -target-feature -Xclang +alu32``.

Commit message:

Sync with NXP linux-lf-6.6.23-2.0.0
Signed-off-by: oleks <Oleks@ArcturusNetworks.com>

Documentation/bpf/clang-notes.rst, after:

.. contents::
.. sectnum::

==========================
Clang implementation notes
==========================

This document provides more details specific to the Clang/LLVM implementation of the eBPF instruction set.

Versions
========

Clang defined "CPU" versions, where a CPU version of 3 corresponds to the current eBPF ISA.

Clang can select the eBPF ISA version using ``-mcpu=v3`` for example to select version 3.

Arithmetic instructions
=======================

For CPU versions prior to 3, Clang v7.0 and later can enable ``BPF_ALU`` support with
``-Xclang -target-feature -Xclang +alu32``.  In CPU version 3, support is automatically included.

Jump instructions
=================

If ``-O0`` is used, Clang will generate the ``BPF_CALL | BPF_X | BPF_JMP`` (0x8d)
instruction, which is not supported by the Linux kernel verifier.

Atomic operations
=================

Clang can generate atomic instructions by default when ``-mcpu=v3`` is
enabled. If a lower version for ``-mcpu`` is set, the only atomic instruction
Clang can generate is ``BPF_ADD`` *without* ``BPF_FETCH``. If you need to enable
the atomics features, while keeping a lower ``-mcpu`` version, you can use
``-Xclang -target-feature -Xclang +alu32``.
